---
layout:     post
title:      
date:       2019-10-17
summary:    How to use AEP DIMMs in the various modes.
categories: jekyll
---

## Introduction

I'm on a system with some Intel® Optane™ Persistent Memory DIMMs, which contain
large capacities of non-volatile memory. From here on out, I'll refer to them
as "AEP", which stands for "Apache Pass", the memory technology that they use
under the hood. The three most common ways of making this memory available to
the operating system are:

  1. 2LM mode (or Memory Mode, or Cache Mode), enabled in the BIOS, which uses
     a number of DDR4 DIMMs as a cache for the AEP DIMMs.
  2. Filesystems, in which you first enable 1LM mode, then install a filesystem
     onto the AEP DIMMs to take advantage of their persistence.
  3. NUMA mode, in which you enable 1LM mode, then bind the AEP DIMMs' memory regions
     to a driver which makes them available as a NUMA node.

In this post, I'm just going to lay out concisely how to get into the first and third modes.

## NUMA Mode

In order to get into NUMA mode:

  1. Ensure you've got a new enough kernel. It needs to be at least version `5.1.0-rc4`.
  2. Change the AEP to `1LM` mode in the BIOS.
  3. Use `ipmctl` to put each individual AEP DIMM into AppDirect mode:
     To do this to all AEP on socket 0, do:

     `ipmctl create -goal -socket 0 PersistentMemoryType=AppDirect`

  4. Reboot. Now the DIMMs that you chose from the previous command will show as one distinct memory region in
     `ipmctl`. However, you need `ndctl` and `daxctl` to bind this region to the appropriate kernel driver.
     The `git checkout` command is only necessary if you want to later use this utility to online your memory
     as `ZONE_NORMAL`, and if `v67` hasn't been released yet.

     `git clone https://github.com/pmem/ndctl.git
     git checkout 3fdaf7ed512ac564a78d6d2c7152be218e39c3c1`

  5. Build the project.
  6. Migrate the device model. This writes to the file `/etc/modprobe.d/daxctl.conf`. If it doesn't, then
     you didn't globally install `daxctl` to your system (it hardcodes some paths, so running this command from
     the source directory doesn't work). Reboot again.
  7. View the memory regions that you created with `ipmctl`, using `ndctl`:
     
     `ndctl list -R`

  8. Create a namespace consisting of that region:

     `ndctl create-namespace --region region0 -m dax`

  9. Ensure you *don't* have `dax_pmem_compat` running: 

     `lsmod | grep "dax_pmem_compat"`

  10. Ensure you *do* have `kmem` running:
     
      `lsmod | grep kmem`

The last step has two methods, depending on whether you want the memory in
`ZONE_NORMAL` or `ZONE_MOVABLE`. [This post](../../../09/13/memory-zone-subtleties/)
explains this conundrum in excrutiating detail.

If you have the kernel configuration `CONFIG_MEMORY_HOTPLUG_DEFAULT_ONLINE`, you can
manually bind the memory to the correct driver, and the kernel will automatically online
the memory as `ZONE_NORMAL` for you:

  1. Find the device that you want to bind. Examples include `dax0.0`,
     `dax1.0`, etc. This will list the namespaces, and within these should be
     the device that they're associated with:

     `ndctl list -N`

  2. Unbind from the `device_dax` driver:

     `echo dax0.0 > /sys/bus/dax/drivers/device_dax/unbind`

  3. Bind to the `kmem` driver:

     `echo dax0.0 > /sys/bus/dax/drivers/kmem/new_id`

If you don't have that configuration, then use the `daxctl` utility to do it
for you. Keep in mind that if you have version `v66` and didn't do the `git
checkout` command above, you won't have the `--no-movable` option.

  1a. For `ZONE_MOVABLE`:
     
     `daxctl reconfigure-device --mode=system-ram all`

  1b. For `ZONE_NORMAL`:

     `daxctl reconfigure-device --no-movable --mode=system-ram all`

## 2LM Mode

In order to get back into 2LM mode:

  1. Switch to "2LM" mode in the BIOS.
  2. Disable and destroy all namespaces:
    {% highlight BASH %}
    ndctl list -N
    ndctl disable-namespace namespace0.0
    ndctl destroy-namespace namespace0.0{% endhighlight %}
  3. Disable all regions:
    {% highlight BASH %}
    ndctl list -R
    ndctl disable-region region0
    ndctl disable-region region1{% endhighlight %}
  4. Put all of each socket's memory in Memory Mode:
    {% highlight BASH %}
    ipmctl create -goal -socket 0 MemoryMode=100
    ipmctl create -goal -socket 1 MemoryMode=100{% endhighlight %}
  5. Reboot again.
